title: Dune 3.9.0
date: "2023-06-30"
tags: [dune, platform, release]
changelog: |
  ## Added
  
  - Include the time it takes to read/write state files when `--trace-file` is
    enabled (#7960, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Include source tree scans in the traces produced by `--trace-file` (#7937,
    @rgrinberg)
  
  - Add `--all` option to `dune rpc status` to show all Dune RPC servers running.
    (#8011, fix #7902, @Alizter)
  
  - Add additional metadata to the traces provided by `--trace-file` whenever
    `--trace-extended` is passed (#7778, @rleshchinskiy)
  
  - `$ dune describe` is now a command group, so arguments to subcommands must be
    passed after subcommand itself. (#7919, @Alizter)
  
  - Add `dune show` command group which is an alias of `dune describe`. (#7946,
    @Alizter)
  
  - Add `dune show env` command and make `dune printenv` an alias of it. (#7985,
    @Alizter)
  
  - Add commands `dune show targets` and `dune show aliases` that display all the
    available targets and aliases in a given directory respectively. (#7770,
    grants #265, @Alizter)
  
  - Extensions used in `(dialect)` can contain periods (e.g., `cppo.ml`). (#7782,
    fixes #7777, @nojb)
  
  - The `interface` and `implementation` fields of a `(dialect)` are now optional
    (#7757, @gpetiot)

  - Add `(build_if)` to the `(test)` stanza. When it evaluates to false, the
    executable is not built. (#7899, fixes #6938, @emillon)
  
  - Allow `(include_subdirs qualified)` to be used when libraries define a
    `(modules ...)` field (#7797, fixes #7597, @anmonteiro)
  
  - Allow multiple globs in library's `(stdlib (internal_modules ..))`
    (@anmonteiro, #7878)
  
  ## Changed
  
  - Do not re-run OCaml syntax files on every iteration of the watch mode. This
    is too memory consuming. (#7894, fix #6900, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Attach melange rules to the default alias (#7926, @haochenx)
  
  - Compute digests and manage sandboxes in background threads (#7947,
    @rgrinberg)
  
  ## Fixed
  
  - Validate file extension for `$ dune ocaml top-module`. (#8005, fixes #8004,
    @3Rafal)
  
  - Cinaps: The promotion rules for cinaps would only offer one file at a time no
    matter how many promotions were available. Now we offer all the promotions at
    once (#7901, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Add necessary parentheses in generated opam constraints (#7682, fixes #3431,
    @Lucccyo)
  
  ## Removed
  
  - Remove some compatibility code for old version of dune that generated
    `.merlin` files. Now dune will never remove `.merlin` files automatically
    (#7562)
  
  - In opam constraints, reject `(and)` and `(or)` with no arguments at parse
    time (#7730, @emillon)

---

The Dune team is pleased to announce the release of Dune 3.9.0. It comes with
many new features, including:

- a new `dune show` command to display various pieces of information.
- some fixes in the dialect support that will make it easier to work with Dream's eml files
- a new `(build_if)` toggle in the `(test)` stanza which will help packaging nonportable tests and benchmarks.
