---
title: Dune 3.13.0
tags: [dune, platform]
changelog: |
  ### Added
  
  - Add command `dune cache clear` to completely delete all traces of the Dune
    cache. (#8975, @nojb)
  
  - Allow to disable Coq 0.8 deprecation warning (#9439, @ejgallego)
  
  - Allow `OCAMLFIND_TOOLCHAIN` to be set per context in the workspace file
    through the `env` stanza. (#9449, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Menhir: generate `.conflicts` file by default. Add new field to the
    `(menhir)` stanza to control the generation of this file: `(explain <blang
    expression>)`. Introduce `(menhir (flags ...) (explain ...))` field in the
    `(env)` stanza, delete `(menhir_flags)` field. All changes are guarded under
    a new version of the Menhir extension, 3.0. (#9512, @nojb)
  
  - Directory targets can now be cached. (#9535, @rleshchinskiy)
  
  - It is now possible to use special forms such as `(:include)` and variables
    `%{read-lines:}` in `(modules)` and similar fields. Note that the
    dependencies introduced in this way (i.e., the files being read) must live in a
    different directory than the stanza making use of them. (#9578, @nojb)
  
  - Remove warning 30 from default set for projects where `dune lang` is at least
    3.13 (#9568, @gasche)
  
  - Add `coqdoc_flags` field to `coq` field of `env` stanza, allowing the setting
    of workspace-wide defaults for `coqdoc_flags`. (#9280, fixes #9139, @Alizter)
  
  - ctypes: fix an error where `(ctypes)` with no `(function_description)` would
    cause an error trying refer to a nonexistent `_stubs.a` dependency (#9302,
    fix #9300, @emillon)
  
  ### Changed
  
  - Check that package names in `(depends)` and related fields in `dune-project`
    are well-formed. (#9472, fixes #9270, @ElectreAAS)
  
  ### Fixed
  
  - Do not ignore `(formatting ..)` settings in context or workspace files
    (#8447, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Fixed a bug where Dune was incorrectly parsing the output of coqdep when it
    was escaped, as is the case on Windows. (#9231, fixes #9218, @Alizter)
  
  - Copying mode for sandboxes will now follow symbolic links (#9282, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Forbid the empty `(binaries ..)` field in the `env` stanza in the workspace
    file unless language version is at least 3.2. (#9309, @rgrinberg)
  
  - [Coq] Fix bug in computation of flags when composed with boot theories.
    (#9347, fixes #7909, @ejgallego)
  
  - Fixed a bug where the `(select)` field of the `(libraries)` field of the
    `(test)` stanza wasn't working properly. (#9387, fixes #9365, @Alizter)
  
  - Fix handling of the `PATH` argument to `dune init proj NAME PATH`. An
    intermediate directory called `NAME` is no longer created if `PATH` is
    supplied, so `dune init proj my_project .` will now initialize a project in
    the current working directory. (#9447, fixes #9209, @shonfeder)
  
  - Experimental doc rules: Correctly handle the case when a package depends upon
    its own sublibraries (#9461, fixes #9456, @jonludlam)
  
  - Resolve various public binaries to their build location, rather than to where
    they're copied in the `_build/install` directory (#9496, fixes #7908,
    @rgrinberg).
  
  - Correctly ignore warning flags in vendored projects (#9515, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Use watch exclusions in watch mode on MacOS (#9643, fixes #9517,
    @PoorlyDefinedBehaviour)
  
  - Fix Merlin configuration for `(include_subdirs qualified)` modules (#9659,
    fixes #8297, @rgrinberg)
  
  - Fix handling of `enabled_if` in binary install stanzas. Previously, we'd
    ignore the result of `enabled_if` when evaluating `%{bin:..}` (#9707,
    @rgrinberg)
---

We're happy to announce that Dune 3.13.0 is now available.
This feature is packed with fixes and new features that you can find in the
changelog.

There are a few new features that we would like to specially highlight.

### Generate Conflicts File for Menhir Grammars ([#9512](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/9512), [@nojb](https://github.com/nojb))

When `menhir` is used to generate code from `.mly` files, there are sometimes
issues with the grammar itself, such as shift-reduce conflicts.

Menhir has an option to generate a "conflicts" file using its `--explain` flag,
but until now this was not exposed by Dune. Starting from this version, this
file will be generated automatically to help developers debug their grammars.

### Cached Directory Targets ([#9535](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/9535), [@rleshchinskiy](https://github.com/rleshchinskiy))

Dune's global cache is a way to save the result of intermediate build results,
even across projects. Previously, it would only work with file targets. With
this change, it now supports Dune's experimental directory targets.

### Dynamic Module List ([#9578](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/9578), [@nojb](https://github.com/nojb))

In several places in the Dune language, it is possible to pass a list of
modules. For example in a `(library)` stanza, if for some reason the default of
picking all the source files in the current directory is not the right thing to
do, it is possible to pass `(module A B C)` to only attach these modules to the
library.

An important limitation has been that the list of modules needed to be static:
written as is in the `dune` file. This limitation has now been lifted and it is
possible to use `(:include)` or `%{read-lines:file}` in this field and similar
ones.

LexiFi's use case is a system of static plug-ins: a program is extended by
selecting which modules are linked to the application core. This list of
modules can now be emitted by a generator that reads a configuration file.

Previously, this required using OCaml syntax for the `dune` file, which has
several issues, including incompatibility with features like
`(include_subdirs)` and poor performance because Dune does not know the
dependencies of the generator and needs to re-run the build more times than
necessary.
