---
title: "OPAM 1.2.2 Released"
authors: [ "Louis Gesbert" ]
date: "2015-05-07"
description: "Release announcement for OPAM 1.2.2"
tags: [opam, platform]
---

[OPAM 1.2.2](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/releases/tag/1.2.2) has just been
released. This fixes a few issues over 1.2.1 and brings a couple of improvements,
in particular better use of the solver to keep the installation as up-to-date as
possible even when the latest version of a package can not be installed.


### Upgrade from 1.2.1 (or earlier)

See the normal
[installation instructions](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html): you should
generally pick up the packages from the same origin as you did for the last
version -- possibly switching from the official repository packages to the ones
we provide for your distribution, in case the former are lagging behind.

There are no changes in repository format, and you can roll back to earlier
versions in the 1.2 branch if needed.

### Improvements

- Conflict messages now report the original version constraints without
  translation, and they have been made more concise in some cases
- Some new `opam lint` checks, `opam lint` now numbers its warnings and may
  provide script-friendly output
- Feature to **automatically install plugins**, e.g. `opam depext` will prompt
  to install `depext` if available and not already installed
- **Priority to newer versions** even when the latest can't be installed (with a
  recent solver only. Before, all non-latest versions were equivalent to the
  solver)
- Added `opam list --resolve` to list a consistent installation scenario
- Be cool by default on errors in OPAM files, these don't concern end-users and
  packagers and CI now have `opam lint` to check them.

### Fixes

- OSX: state cache got broken in 1.2.1, which could induce longer startup times.
  This is now fixed
- `opam config report` has been fixed to report the external solver properly
- `--dry-run --verbose` properly outputs all commands that would be run again
- Providing a simple path to an aspcud executable as external solver (through
  options or environment) works again, for backwards-compatibility
- Fixed a fd leak on solver calls (thanks Ivan Gotovchits)
- `opam list` now returns 0 when no packages match but no pattern was supplied,
  which is more helpful in scripts relying on it to check dependencies.
