---
title: "opam 2.0.10"
authors: [ "David Allsopp", "Raja Boujbel", "Louis Gesbert"]
date: "2021-11-15"
description: "Release announcement for opam 2.0.10"
tags: [opam, platform]
changelog: |
  * Fix reverting environment additions to PATH-like variables when several dirs
    added at once [#4861 @dra27]
  * Ensure setenv can use package variables defined during the build
    [#4841 @dra27]
---

_Feedback on this post is welcomed on [Discuss](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/ann-opam-2-1-1-opam-2-0-10-opam-depext-1-2/8872)!_

We are pleased to announce the release of [opam 2.0.10](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/releases/tag/2.0.10).

Two subtle fixes are included in opam 2.0.10. These actually affect the `ocaml` package. Both of these are Heisenbugs - investigating what's going wrong on your system may well have fixed them, they were both found on Windows!

`$(opam env --revert)` is the reverse of the more familiar `$(opam env)` but it's effectively called by opam whenever you change switch. It has been wrong since 2.0.0 for the case where several values are added to an environment variable in one `setenv` update. For example, if a package included a `setenv` field of the form `[PATH += "dir1:dir2"]`, then this would not be reverted, but `[[PATH += "dir1"] [PATH += "dir2"]]` would be reverted. As it happens, this bug affects the `ocaml` package, but it was masked by another `setenv` update in the same package.

The other fix is also to do with `setenv`. It can be seen immediately after creating a switch but before any additional packages are installed, as this `Dockerfile` shows:

```dockerfile
FROM ocaml/opam@sha256:244b948376767fe91e2cd5caca3b422b2f8d332f105ef2c8e14fcc9a20b66e25
RUN sudo apt-get install -y ocaml-nox
RUN opam --version
RUN opam switch create show-issue ocaml-system
RUN eval $(opam env) ; echo $CAML_LD_LIBRARY_PATH
RUN opam install conf-which
RUN eval $(opam env) ; echo $CAML_LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

Immediately after switch creation, `$CAML_LD_LIBRARY_PATH` was set to `/home/opam/.opam/show-issue/lib/stublibs:`, rather than `/home/opam/.opam/show-issue/lib/stublibs:/usr/local/lib/ocaml/4.08.1/stublibs:/usr/lib/ocaml/stublibs`

---

Opam installation instructions (unchanged):

1. From binaries: run

    ```
    bash -c "sh <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.sh) --version 2.0.10"
    ```

    or download manually from [the Github "Releases" page](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/releases/tag/2.1.1) to your PATH. In this case, don't forget to run `opam init --reinit -ni` to enable sandboxing if you had version 2.0.0~rc manually installed or to update you sandbox script.

2. From source, using opam:

    ```
    opam update; opam install opam-devel
    ```

   (then copy the opam binary to your PATH as explained, and don't forget to run `opam init --reinit -ni` to enable sandboxing if you had version 2.0.0~rc manually installed or to update your sandbox script)

3. From source, manually: see the instructions in the [README](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/tree/2.1.1#compiling-this-repo).

We hope you enjoy this new minor version, and remain open to [bug reports](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/issues) and [suggestions](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/issues).
