---
id: your-first-program
title: Your First OCaml Program
description: >
  Learn how to write your very first OCaml program.
category: "First Steps"
recommended_next_tutorials:
  - "values-and-functions"
  - "basic-data-types"
  - "loops-recursion"
  - "lists"
---

To complete this tutorial, you need to have [installed OCaml](/install). Optionally, we recommend [configuring your editor](/docs/set-up-editor).

We will work with files containing OCaml source code and compile them to produce executable binaries. However, this is not a detailed tutorial on OCaml compilation, project modularisation, or dependencies management; it only gives a glimpse at those topics. The goal is to sketch the bigger picture in order to avoid getting lost in the details. In other words, we do breadth-first learning instead of depth-first learning.

In the previous tutorial most commands were entered in UTop. In this tutorial, the majority of commands should be entered into a terminal. Code examples starting with a dollar sign `$` are intended to be entered in the terminal, while lines starting with a hash sign `#` are intended to be entered in UTop.

Once you've completed this tutorial, you should be able to create, compile, and execute an OCaml project using Dune, OCaml's build system. You will be able to work with files, make private definitions within modules, and know how to install and use opam packages.

<!--
Once you've completed this tutorial, you should be able to:
- Create an OCaml project from scratch, using Dune
- Trigger project compilation and execution using Dune
- Delete files in an automatically created project without breaking everything
- Split code in several files, use imported definitions
- Make a definition private
- Download, install, and use a package from the open source repository


How to work on several OCaml projects simultaneously is out of the scope of this tutorial. Currently (Summer 2023), this requires using opam local [_switches_](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/man/opam-switch.html). This allows handling different sets of dependencies per project. Check the Best Practices document on [Dependencies](https://ocaml.org/docs/managing-dependencies) addressing that matter for detailed instructions. This document was written and tested using a global switch, which is created by default when installing opam and can be ignored in the beginning.
-->

**Note**: The files illustrating this tutorial are available as a [Git repo](https://github.com/ocaml-web/ocamlorg-docs-your-first-program).

## Working Within an opam Switch

When you installed OCaml, a global opam switch was created automatically. This tutorial can be completed while working inside this global opam switch.

When you work on several OCaml projects simultaneously, you should create more opam switches. For instructions on how to do that, see [Introduction to opam Switches](/docs/opam-switch-introduction).

## Compiling OCaml Programs

By default, OCaml comes with two compilers: one translating sources into native binaries and another turning sources into a bytecode format. OCaml also comes with an interpreter for that bytecode format. This tutorial demonstrates how to use the native compiler to write OCaml programs.

<!-- Other compilers exist, for instance, [js_of_ocaml](https://ocsigen.org/js_of_ocaml) generates JavaScript. The toplevel uses the bytecode compiler; expressions are read, type-checked, compiled into bytecode, and executed. The previous tutorial was interactive because we used the toplevel. -->

We start by setting up a traditional “Hello, World!” project using Dune. Make sure to have installed version 3.12 or later. The following creates a project named `hello`:

```shell
$ opam exec -- dune init proj hello
Success: initialized project component named hello
```

**Note**: If you have run `eval $(opam env)` at the start of your current terminal session, or if you answered yes to the question that was asked when you ran `opam init`, you can omit `opam exec --` from the start of `dune` commands.

**Note**: Throughout this tutorial, outputs generated by Dune might vary slightly because of the Dune version installed. This tutorial shows the output for Dune 3.12. If you'd like to get the most recent version of Dune, run `opam update; opam upgrade dune` in a terminal.

The project is stored in a directory named `hello`. The `tree` command lists the files and directories created. It might be necessary to install `tree` if you don't see the following. Through Homebrew, for example, run `brew install tree`.

**Note**: If you get an error in Homebrew from this in an Apple silicon macOS, it's likely an issue with the architecture switch from Intel to ARM. Please refer to the [ARM64 Fix](/docs/arm64-fix) to remedy the ARM64 error.
```shell
$ cd hello
$ tree
.
├── bin
│   ├── dune
│   └── main.ml
├── _build
│   └── log
├── dune-project
├── hello.opam
├── lib
│   └── dune
└── test
    ├── dune
    └── hello.ml

4 directories, 8 files
```

OCaml source files have the `.ml` extension, which stands for “Meta Language.” Meta Language (ML) is an ancestor of OCaml. This is also what the “ml” stands for in “OCaml.” Here is the content of the `bin/main.ml` file:
```ocaml
let () = print_endline "Hello, World!"
```

The project-wide metadata is available in the `dune-project` file. It contains information about the project name, dependencies, and global setup.

Each directory containing source files that need to be built must contain a `dune` file describing how.

This builds the project:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune build
```

This launches the executable it creates:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello
Hello, World!
```

Let's see what happens when we edit the `bin/main.ml` file directly. Open it in your editor and replace the word `World` with your first name. Recompile the project with `dune build` as before, and then launch it again with `dune exec hello`.

Voilà! You've just written your first OCaml program.

In the rest of this tutorial, we will make more changes to this project in order to illustrate OCaml's tooling.

## Watch Mode

Before we dive in, note that you will typically want to use Dune's watch mode to continually compile and optionally restart your program. This ensures that the language server has the freshest possible data about your project, so your editor support will be top-notch. To use watch mode, just add the `-w` flag:

```shell
$ opam exec -- dune build -w
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello -w
```

## Why Isn't There a Main Function?

Although `bin/main.ml`'s name suggests it contains the application entry point into the project, it does not contain a dedicated `main` function, and there is no requirement that a project must contain a file with that name in order to produce an executable. A compiled OCaml file behaves as though that file were entered line by line into the toplevel. In other words, an executable OCaml file's entry point is its first line.

Double semicolons aren't needed in source files like they are in the toplevel. Statements are just processed in order from top to bottom, each triggering the side effects it may have. Definitions are added to the environment. Values resulting from nameless expressions are ignored. Side effects from all those will take place in the same order. That's OCaml main.

However, it is common practice to single out a value that triggers all the side effects and mark it as the intended main entry point. In OCaml, that's the role of `let () =`, which evaluates the expression on the right, including all the side effects, without creating a name.

## Modules and the Standard Library, Cont'd

Let's summarise what was said about modules in the [Tour of OCaml](/docs/tour-of-ocaml):
- A module is a collection of named values.
- Identical names from distinct modules don't clash.
- The standard library is collection of several modules.

Modules aid in organising projects; concerns can be separated into isolated modules. This is outlined in the next section. Before creating a module ourselves, we'll demonstrate using a definition from a module of the standard library. Change the content of the file `bin/main.ml` to this:
```ocaml
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" "Hello, World!"
```

This replaces the function `print_endline` with the function `printf` from the `Printf` module in the standard library. Building and executing this modified version should produce the same output as before. Use `dune exec hello` to try it for yourself.

## Every File Defines a Module

Each OCaml file defines a module, once compiled. This is how separate compilation works in OCaml. Each sufficiently standalone concern should be isolated into a module. References to external modules create dependencies. Circular dependencies between modules are not allowed.

To create a module, let's create a new file named `lib/en.ml` containing this:
```ocaml
let v = "Hello, world!"
```

Here is a new version of the `bin/main.ml` file:
```ocaml
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" Hello.En.v
```

Now execute the resulting project:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello
Hello, world!
```

The file `lib/en.ml` creates the module named `En`, which in turn defines a string value named `v`. Dune wraps `En` into another module called `Hello`; this name is defined by the stanza `name hello` in the file `lib/dune`. The string definition is `Hello.En.v` from the `bin/main.ml` file.


Dune can launch UTop to access the modules exposed by a project interactively. Here's how:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune utop
```

Then, inside the `utop` toplevel, it is possible to inspect our `Hello.En` module:
```ocaml
# #show Hello.En;;
module Hello : sig val v : string end
```

Now exit `utop` with `Ctrl-D` or enter `#quit;;` before going to the next section.

**Note**: If you add a file named `hello.ml` in the `lib` directory, Dune will consider this the whole `Hello` module and it will make `En` unreachable. If you want your module `En` to be visible, you need to add this in your `hello.ml` file:
```ocaml
module En = En
```
<!-- FIXME refer to Dune/Library tutorial when available -->

## Defining Module Interfaces

UTop's `#show` command displays an [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API#Libraries_and_frameworks) (in the software library sense): the list of definitions provided by a module. In OCaml, this is called a _module interface_. An `.ml` file defines a module. In a similar way, an `.mli` file defines a module interface. The module interface file corresponding to a module file must have the same base name, e.g., `en.mli` is the module interface for module `en.ml`. Create a `lib/en.mli` file with this content:
```ocaml
val v : string
```

Observe that only the list of the module signature's declarations (which is between `sig` and `end` in the `#show` output) has been written in the interface file `lib/en.mli`. This is explained in more detail in the tutorial dedicated to [modules](/docs/modules).

Module interfaces are also used to create _private_ definitions. A module definition is private if it is not listed in its corresponding module interface. If no module interface file exists, everything is public.

Amend the `lib/en.ml` file in your preferred editor; replace what's there with the following:

```ocaml
let hello = "Hello"
let v = hello ^ ", world!"
```

Also edit the `bin/main.ml` file like this:
```ocaml
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" Hello.En.hello
```

Trying to compile this fails.
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune build
File "hello/bin/main.ml", line 1, characters 30-43:
1 | let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" Hello.En.hello
                                  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Error: Unbound value Hello.En.hello
```

This is because we haven't changed `lib/en.mli`. Since it does not list
`hello`, it is therefore private.

## Defining Multiple Modules in a Library
Multiple modules can be defined in a single library. To demonstrate this,
create a new file named `lib/es.ml` with the following content:

```ocaml
let v = "¡Hola, mundo!"
```

And use the new module in `bin/main.ml`:
```ocaml
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" Hello.Es.v
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" Hello.En.v
```

Finally, run `dune build` and `dune exec hello` to see the new output, using the modules
you just created in the `hello` library.

```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello
¡Hola, mundo!
Hello, world!
```

A more detailed introduction to modules can be found at [Modules](/docs/modules).

## Installing and Using Modules From a Package

OCaml has an active community of open-source contributors. Most projects are available using the opam package manager, which you installed in the [Install OCaml](/docs/up-and-ready) tutorial. The following section shows you how to install and use a package from opam's open-source repository.

To illustrate this, let's update our `hello` project to parse a string containing an [S-expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression) and print back to a string, both using [Sexplib](https://github.com/janestreet/sexplib). First, update the package list for opam by running `opam update`. Then, install the `Sexplib` package with this command:
```shell
$ opam install sexplib
```

Next, define a string containing a valid S-expression in `bin/main.ml`. Parse
it into a S-expression with  the  `Sexplib.Sexp.of_string` function, and then
convert it back into a string with `Sexplib.Sexp.to_string` and print it.

```ocaml
(* Read in Sexp from string *)
let exp1 = Sexplib.Sexp.of_string "(This (is an) (s expression))"

(* Do something with the Sexp ... *)

(* Convert back to a string to print *)
let () = Printf.printf "%s\n" (Sexplib.Sexp.to_string exp1)
```
The string you entered representing a valid S-expression is parsed into
an S-expression type, which is defined as either an `Atom` (string) or a `List` 
of S-expressions (it's a recursive type). Refer to the [Sexplib documentation](https://github.com/janestreet/sexplib) for more information.

Before the example will build and run, you need to tell Dune that it needs `Sexplib` to compile the project. Do this by adding `Sexplib` to the `library` stanza of the `bin/dune` file. The full `bin/dune` file should then match the following.

```lisp
(executable
 (public_name hello)
 (name main)
 (libraries hello sexplib))
```

**Fun fact**: Dune configuration files are S-expressions.

Finally, execute as before:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello
(This(is an)(s expression))
```

## Using the Preprocessor to Generate Code

<!-- https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml.org/pull/2249 -->
**Note**: This example was successfully tested on Windows using DkML 2.1.0. Run `dkml version` to see the version.

Let's assume we'd like `hello` to display its output as if it was a list of strings in UTop: `["hello"; "using"; "an"; "opam"; "library"]`. To do that, we need a function turning a `string list` into a `string`, adding brackets, spaces, and commas. Instead of defining it ourselves, let's generate it automatically with a package. We'll use [`ppx_deriving`](https://github.com/ocaml-ppx/ppx_deriving). Here is how to install it:
```shell
$ opam install ppx_deriving
```

Dune needs to be told how to use it, which is done in the `lib/dune` file. Note that this is different from the `bin/dune` file that you edited earlier! Open up the `lib/dune` file, and edit it to look like this:
```lisp
(library
 (name hello)
 (preprocess (pps ppx_deriving.show)))
```

The line `(preprocess (pps ppx_deriving.show))` means that before compilation the source needs to be transformed using the preprocessor `show` provided by the package `ppx_deriving`. It is not required to write `(libraries ppx_deriving)`, Dune infers that from the `preprocess` stanza.

The files `lib/en.ml` and `lib/en.mli` need to be edited, too:

**`lib/en.mli`**
```ocaml
val string_of_string_list : string list -> string
val v : string list
```

**`lib/en.ml`**
```ocaml
let string_of_string_list = [%show: string list]

let v = String.split_on_char ' ' "Hello using an opam library"
```

Let's read this from the bottom up:
- `v` has the type `string list`. We're using `String.split_on_char` to turn a `string` into a `string list` by splitting the string on space characters.
- `string_of_string_list` has type `string list -> string`. This converts a list of strings into a string, applying the expected formatting.

Finally, you'll also need to edit `bin/main.ml`
```ocaml
let () = print_endline Hello.En.(string_of_string_list v)
```

Here is the result:
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec hello
["Hello"; "using"; "an"; "opam"; "library"]
```

## A Sneak-Peek at Dune as a One-Stop Shop

This section explains the purpose of the files and directories created by `dune proj init` which haven't been mentioned earlier.

Along the history of OCaml, several build systems have been used. As of writing this tutorial (Summer 2023), Dune is the mainstream one, which is why it is used in the tutorial. Dune automatically extracts the dependencies between the modules from the files and compiles them in a compatible order. It only needs one `dune` file per directory where there is something to build. The three directories created by `dune proj init` have the following purposes:
- `bin`: executable programs
- `lib`: libraries
- `test`: tests

There will be a tutorial dedicated to Dune. This tutorial will present the many features of Dune, a few of which are listed here:
- Running tests
- Generating documentation
- Producing packaging metadata (here in `hello.opam`)
- Creating arbitrary files using all-purpose rules

The `_build` directory is where Dune stores all the files it generates. It can be deleted at any time, but subsequent builds will recreate it.

## Minimum Setup

In this last section, let's create a bare minimum project, highlighting what's really needed for Dune to work. We begin by creating a fresh project directory:
```shell
$ cd ..
$ mkdir minimo
$ cd minimo
```

At the very least, Dune only needs two files: `dune-project` and one `dune` file. Here is how to write them with as little text as possible:

`dune-project`
```lisp
(lang dune 3.6)
```

`dune`
```lisp
(executable (name minimo))
```

`minimo.ml`
```ocaml
let () = print_endline "My name is Minimo"
```

That's all! This is sufficient for Dune to build and execute the `minimo.ml` file.
```shell
$ opam exec -- dune exec ./minimo.exe
My name is Minimo
```

**Note**: `minimo.exe` is not a file name. This is how Dune is told to compile the `minimo.ml` file using OCaml's native compiler instead of the bytecode compiler. As a fun fact, note that an empty file is valid OCaml syntax. You can use that to reduce `minimo` even more; of course, it will not display anything, but it will be a valid project!

## Conclusion

This tutorial is the last of the "Getting Started" series. Moving forward, you have enough to pick and choose among the other tutorials to follow your own learning path.

<!--
TODO: link Project Quickstart If you're already familiar with lists, maps, and folds, and need to be productive as fast as possible, dive into the “Project Quickstart” guide.
-->
