---
title: 'OCaml: Memory Safety and Beyond'
description: "Your choice of programming language matters. A recent press release
  from the US National Security Agency (NSA), in tandem with the US\u2026"
url: https://tarides.com/blog/2023-12-14-ocaml-memory-safety-and-beyond
date: 2023-12-14T00:00:00-00:00
preview_image: https://tarides.com/static/39183b3a4ca497e6bdc75ebf592bde59/eee8e/memorysafety1.jpg
authors:
- Tarides
source:
---

<p>Your choice of programming language matters. A <a href="https://www.nsa.gov/Press-Room/Press-Releases-Statements/Press-Release-View/Article/3608324/us-and-international-partners-issue-recommendations-to-secure-software-products/">recent press release</a> from the US National Security Agency (NSA), in tandem with the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) alongside international cybersecurity agencies, urges the adoption of memory-safe programming languages for enhanced software security. We see a strong alignment between this global effort and Tarides&rsquo; principles and practices.</p>
<p>Our recent blog posts &quot;<a href="https://tarides.com/blog/2023-08-17-your-programming-language-and-its-impact-on-the-cybersecurity-of-your-application/">Your Programming Language and Its Impact on Cybersecurity</a>&quot; and &quot;<a href="https://tarides.com/blog/2023-07-05-zero-day-attacks-what-are-they-and-can-a-language-like-ocaml-protect-you/">Zero-Day Attacks: What Are They, and Can a Language Like OCaml Protect You?</a>&quot; underscore the importance of selecting the right programming languages for robust cybersecurity measures.   However, while memory safety is crucial, it's only part of the picture. OCaml as a language not only addresses this need but goes beyond it with even stronger guarantees.</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#addressing-the-core-memory-safety" aria-label="addressing the core memory safety permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>Addressing the Core: Memory Safety</h2>
<p>OCaml stands out in the landscape of programming languages due to its unique combination of features that promote software reliability and security. It's a functional language with a strong static type system, making it inherently robust against many common software vulnerabilities. Its design encourages developers to write code that is not only efficient but inherently safer and easier to maintain.</p>
<p>One of the key strengths of OCaml is its type system, which eliminates a whole class of errors at compile time, significantly reducing the possibility of runtime errors and vulnerabilities. This aspect of OCaml is particularly valuable in developing critical systems where reliability is paramount. Moreover, OCaml's functional programming paradigm encourages immutability and stateless designs, further contributing to its robustness. These features make OCaml an ideal choice for developing applications where security and reliability are non-negotiable.</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#the-remaining-30-beyond-memory-safety" aria-label="the remaining 30 beyond memory safety permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>The Remaining 30%: Beyond Memory Safety</h2>
<p>While memory safety is crucial, as it addresses approximately <a href="https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/urgent-need-memory-safety-software-products">70% of security bugs</a>,  OCaml's capabilities extend to the remaining 30% by offering robust solutions for the more nuanced and complex aspects of software security. Among these solutions are formal verification and unikernels &ndash; tools that Tarides actively combines for security-oriented customers like Nitrokey and their <a href="https://www.nitrokey.com/products/nethsm">NetHSM</a> products.</p>
<p><strong>Formal verification</strong> involves using mathematical and logical techniques to rigorously prove the correctness of software systems. This process ensures that programs perform as expected and adhere to specific, precisely defined specifications. Tools like Inria&rsquo;s <a href="https://coq.inria.fr/">Coq</a> or Microsoft&rsquo;s <a href="https://www.fstar-lang.org/">F*</a> &ndash; both systems developed in OCaml &ndash; can generate fully verified OCaml components like the <a href="https://github.com/mit-plv/fiat-crypto">cryptographic primitives</a> used in the <a href="https://mirage.io/">MirageOS</a> unikernel project. They enable developers to construct formal mathematical proofs, verifying the exact properties of code and ensuring its behaviour aligns with its intended function. Other tools like <a href="https://github.com/ocaml-gospel/gospel">GOSPEL</a> allow programmers to annotate OCaml programs with specifications that can be verified statistically or enforced at runtime.</p>
<p><strong>Unikernels</strong> are specialised, single-address-space machine images constructed by using library operating systems. By using OCaml to develop unikernels, such as in the <a href="https://mirage.io">MirageOS</a> project, application complexity and attack surface is greatly reduced. Unikernels strip down the traditional operating system to the bare minimum, removing unnecessary components that could be potential vectors for security breaches. This streamlined architecture not only enhances performance but significantly bolsters security by reducing the areas that malicious actors can exploit, leading to an order of magnitude reduction of the size of the deployed systems in production.</p>
<p>The combination of OCaml's memory safety features and built-in integration with a formal verification ecosystem, as well as the extreme specialisation of its unikernel compilation target via MirageOS, makes it an exceptional choice for developing high-assurance software for embedded and cloud deployments. This end-to-end approach to security tackles the prevalent issues of memory safety and the more subtle, complex vulnerabilities that require deeper mathematical rigour to resolve.</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#want-to-give-ocaml-a-try-contact-us-today" aria-label="want to give ocaml a try contact us today permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>Want to Give OCaml a Try? Contact us Today</h2>
<p>OCaml more than meets the NSA and CISA's <a href="https://media.defense.gov/2023/Dec/06/2003352724/-1/-1/0/THE-CASE-FOR-MEMORY-SAFE-ROADMAPS-TLP-CLEAR.PDF">criteria for memory safety</a>: it goes above and beyond, offering comprehensive solutions to a whole host of software security challenges. Its combination of functional programming with a strong type system and a rich formal verification ecosystem positions it as a powerful tool for secure software development. MirageOS and its unikernel based technology leverages these strengths to build small, secure, and efficient applications.</p>
<p>Embracing OCaml today means you are both responding to immediate security concerns and preparing for the complexities of future cybersecurity challenges. Tarides can help you leverage the power of OCaml to achieve a higher standard of software security and reliability.</p>
<p>We would be thrilled to hear from you! Please <a href="https://tarides.com/contact">contact us</a> so we can discuss how OCaml can work for you.</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Tarides is an international software company with offices in Cambridge (UK), Paris (France), and Chennai (India), founded in 2018 by pioneers of systems and functional programming. We have a worldwide presence with collaborators working remotely from the US, Australia, Canada, India, Japan, and across Europe. We have a solid academic background with connections to the University of Cambridge, Inria, and IIT Madras. Our diverse team of 60+ people performs groundbreaking innovation, feature development, and crucial maintenance of OCaml-based projects. Tarides aims to empower developers, communities, and organisations to adopt OCaml as their primary programming experience by providing training, expertise, and development services.</p>
</blockquote>
