---
title: Tarides is on the Wavestone Radar!
description: "Cybersecurity is a growing concern for individuals and companies alike.
  At Tarides, security is at the centre of every solution we provide\u2026"
url: https://tarides.com/blog/2022-07-19-tarides-is-on-the-wavestone-radar
date: 2022-07-19T00:00:00-00:00
preview_image: https://tarides.com/static/3b138a9f13e3d1c08b71a08fd516fc3c/0132d/wavestone.jpg
featured:
---

<p><em>Cybersecurity is a growing concern for individuals and companies alike. At Tarides, security is at the centre of every solution we provide, and this year we have been recognised for our efforts! We&rsquo;ve been accepted to <a href="https://tarides.com/blog/2022-06-28-thales-cyber-station-f-selection">Cyber@StationF&rsquo;s acceleration program</a> and are now featured in the 2022 Cybersecurity Startup Radar.</em></p>
<p>Tarides is proud to announce that we&rsquo;re part of the <a href="https://www.wavestone.com/en/insight/cybersecurity-startups-radar-2022/">2022 Cybersecurity Startup Radar</a> by Wavestone and BPIFrance! It spotlights promising startups who are making a difference in the cybersecurity arena. Tarides has been featured in the Radar twice before, in 2019 and in 2020.</p>
<p>Tarides is featured under the &lsquo;IoT Security&rsquo; section of the Wavestone Radar, demonstrating our commitment to creating safer and more efficient software for the IoT (Internet of Things) ecosystem. At Tarides, security-by-design is at the core of everything we do; it&rsquo;s our guiding development principle that we use to produce a variety of solutions addressing the different challenges present in this space.</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#taridess-cybersecurity-solutions" aria-label="taridess cybersecurity solutions permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>Tarides&rsquo;s Cybersecurity Solutions</h2>
<p>Most of today&rsquo;s software solutions are very complex and as a result often inefficient and vulnerable to attack. It is well documented that IoT technology and devices can pose safety risks due to their development environment and limited processing capabilities that don&rsquo;t offer full protection from attacks.</p>
<p>Our technology solves these problems in a revolutionary way by combining the features of OCaml (focused on security, safety, and efficiency) with state-of-the-art tools (as part of MirageOS) to provide solutions to complex problems where mistakes can have disastrous consequences.</p>
<p>Firstly, we provide several solutions relating to device connectivity, from internet protocols to low-bandwidth networks. Secondly, we build custom applications that are securely deployed on IoT devices either on bare-metal or within hypervisors. MirageOS provides an efficient IoT environment with a small footprint. Finally, we address the IoT security layer via formally verified cryptographic libraries and other security building blocks that match the latest standards.</p>
<p>We maintain a special focus on cybersecurity to ensure that efficiency and security go hand-in-hand, and that one is not achieved at the expense of the other. We develop and maintain secure, fast, and performant code solutions that leverage OCaml's strong safety features for reliable results. We collaborate closely with the thriving open-source community surrounding the language, which constantly tests and audits its performance.</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#about-the-radar" aria-label="about the radar permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>About the Radar</h2>
<p>The Radar is used to analyse the French cybersecurity sector: what solutions are being worked on, what trends are emerging, and what kind of innovation is happening. In light of the current geopolitical climate, cybersecurity is a major strategic issue now more than ever. Consequently, this year&rsquo;s Radar is perhaps even more salient than those of previous years, as it highlights the role of France&rsquo;s innovation ecosystem in advancing cybersecurity goals.
By being featured, Tarides gains a lot of visibility in the sector and can also discover other startups and promising projects in the same field. We&rsquo;re excited to be part of this great networking opportunity!</p>
<h2 style="position:relative;"><a href="https://tarides.com/feed.xml#about-wavestone--bpi-france" aria-label="about wavestone  bpi france permalink" class="anchor before"><svg aria-hidden="true" focusable="false" height="16" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 16 16" width="16"><path fill-rule="evenodd" d="M4 9h1v1H4c-1.5 0-3-1.69-3-3.5S2.55 3 4 3h4c1.45 0 3 1.69 3 3.5 0 1.41-.91 2.72-2 3.25V8.59c.58-.45 1-1.27 1-2.09C10 5.22 8.98 4 8 4H4c-.98 0-2 1.22-2 2.5S3 9 4 9zm9-3h-1v1h1c1 0 2 1.22 2 2.5S13.98 12 13 12H9c-.98 0-2-1.22-2-2.5 0-.83.42-1.64 1-2.09V6.25c-1.09.53-2 1.84-2 3.25C6 11.31 7.55 13 9 13h4c1.45 0 3-1.69 3-3.5S14.5 6 13 6z"></path></svg></a>About Wavestone &amp; BPI France</h2>
<p><a href="https://www.wavestone.com/en/">Wavestone</a> operates at the intersection of management and consulting, helping their clients not just overcome but master challenges whether they be digital, competitive, or environmental. Their mission is to guide organisations during critical transformations, helping them obtain the best results. Furthermore, they are also committed to promoting ethical and sustainable solutions that benefit society as a whole.</p>
<p><a href="https://www.bpifrance.com">BPI France</a> is a financial institution whose mission is to support entrepreneurs and visionaries who take risks to achieve their goals and grow their businesses. BPI France has many resources that they make available to companies, offering support for innovation, coaching, acceleration programmes, and international expansion. They focus on smaller businesses such as microbusinesses, SMEs, and mid-caps, but also offer solutions for larger companies.</p>
