---
title: 11 Dec 2023
description:
url: https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-12-11.html
date: 2023-12-11T00:00:00-00:00
preview_image:
authors:
- Ryan Gibb
source:
---

<article>
    <div class="container">
        <span>  Previous: <a href="https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-12-04.html"> 4 Dec 2023</a>  </span>
        <span>  Next: <a href="https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-12-18.html">18 Dec 2023</a>  </span>
    </div>
    
    <section>
        <h2>Report for Huwawi
Studentship Update</h2>
<p><span>Sent to Ben
Karniely.</span></p>
<blockquote>
<p><span>My research
over the past year has focused on addressing a fundamental limitation in
the current Internet architecture - the lack of support for naming
physical locations and resolving them to various addressing mechanisms
beyond IP. To address this gap, we have proposed the Spatial Name System
(SNS), which enables the assignment of hierarchical location-based names
and provides global and local resolution schemes. The SNS extends the
Domain Name System (DNS), allowing the integration of spatial names into
existing applications and opening up new possibilities for sensor
networks and augmented reality.</span></p>
<p><span>Thanks to
Huawei’s Hisilicon Studentship I had the opportunity to present this <a href="https://ryan.freumh.org/papers/2023-hotnets-sns.pdf">research</a>
at <a href="https://conferences.sigcomm.org/hotnets/2023/program.html">HotNets-XXIII</a>
in the session on “The architecture of the Internet, and datacenter
networks” at MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. This presentation allowed me
to share our findings and receive valuable feedback from experts in the
field. We are currently planning to implement the Spatial Name System
based on an experimental tested DNS server written using OCaml 5’s new
effect-based IO, and intend to write a comprehensive conference paper on
it in the new year.</span></p>
<p><span>In addition to
the Spatial Name System project, I am also actively involved in other
research topics. I am working on reproducible self-hosted infrastructure
using functional software and configuration deployments and have a
research internship project proposal focused on polyglot package
management, expressing dependencies across different language
ecosystems. These projects align with my broader research goals and
provide opportunities for collaboration.</span></p>
<p><span>In conclusion,
the past year has been productive and promising in advancing our
understanding of spatial naming within the Internet architecture. I look
forward to continuing these efforts and contributing to the broader
research community.</span></p>
</blockquote>
    </section>
</article>

