---
title: 30 Oct 2023
description:
url: https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-10-30.html
date: 2023-10-30T00:00:00-00:00
preview_image:
authors:
- Ryan Gibb
source:
---

<article>
    <div class="container">
        <span>  Previous: <a href="https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-10-23.html">23 Oct 2023</a>  </span>
        <span>  Next: <a href="https://ryan.freumh.org/2023-11-06.html"> 6 Nov 2023</a>  </span>
    </div>
    
    <section>
        <h2>HotNets</h2>
<p><span>Organised travel dates, travel, and
accommodation for HotNets.</span></p>
<p><span>I was awarded a Queens’ College Perry
Travel Award to the value of £740!</span></p>
<h2>Met with Anil</h2>
<p><span>Agreed to schedule dates to visit NYC
and then find a time to meet Jane Street to discuss the polyglot package
management project proposal. I’m going to take the train from Boston to
NYC! Anil said I’ve got to get a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Junior_Ranger_Program">Junior Ranger
Badge</a> from a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_National_Park_System_areas_in_New_York">National
Park in NYC</a>.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil recommended live blogging the
conference on Mastodon.</span></p>
<p><span>Talked about what a HotNets
presentation could look like, and whether a live demo was feasible.
Maybe I could pull AEON and Patrick’s OCaml R-Tree together into
something workable. I think while very cool the APIs just aren’t there
for the AR demo on a hololens. A smartphone (e.g.&nbsp;iPhone LIDAR) could be
a lot more feasible though… I think considering the goals here is a
useful exercise. I’m going to say the goals of this presentation
are:</span></p>
<ul>
<li>To get people excited enough to read the paper.</li>
<li>To get people to come and talk to me about ideas for or issues they
see with the SNS.</li>
</ul>
<p><span>This should inform a SIGCOMM
paper.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil asked if AEON is
production-ready, and I said I’ve been running it on my server for
(according to my NixOS config git history) 9 months! There is a lot of
stuff around tunnelling in there that complicates things, but that is
useful for the DNS over DNS Oblivously (DoDO) idea. We’ve also discussed
a signpost-like idea that AEON could be adapted to taking on similar
functionalities to a TailScale control server. I think Jane Street has a
Noise protocol WireGuard implementation lying around that could prove
useful.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil cautioned me against spending
time on Hibernia. He said the idea of a service graph for things trying
to run that could be dynamically pushed into machines and migrated is
more interesting. We’ve discussed a similar idea realting to Eilean
before.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil said when writing or presenting
to consider the input mental state of the recpients and the desired
output state. Every paragraph is a process, control extraneous
thoughts.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil encouraged keeping multiple
projects in a ‘flywheel’.</span></p>
<p><span>We discussed deploying Matrix servers
on eboards on physical spaces for the EEG.</span></p>
<h2>Met with Anil and Magnus</h2>
<p><span>Discussed the R-Tree based
ARP (a link-layer independant spatial resolution).</span></p>
<p><span>Similar to ray-casting
game engines, responding with RRs.</span></p>
<p><span>Eval - 2
scenarios:</span></p>
<ul>
<li>low latency</li>
<li>global &amp; local</li>
</ul>
<p><span>Magnus mentioned frequency
scaling.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil encourage thinking
about the full connection pipeline lifecycle (in &lt;20ms).</span></p>
<p><span>Magnus is thinking a lot
about how to bootstrap this, e.g.&nbsp;how to get the DNS server you resolve
to with 5g… or just your physcial presense without any network
connectvity.</span></p>
<p><span>PUB/SUB came up a few
times, but I think request/response is more approriate. You can return
multiple responses to a query. Maybe PUB/SUB would be useful for mobile
devices.</span></p>
<p><span>We talked about access
control, getting quite fine-grained (guests in your house not being able
to turn your themostat on). I think some of this should be in the pervue
of the naming system (e.g.&nbsp;can you address this device), but some should
be left to the other policies and mechanisms otherwise it gets way too
complicated too quickly (expressing access control over functionality of
a device). DNS update keys could be one way to authenticate access
control.</span></p>
<p><span>Talked about iPhone
LIDAR’s. How you could scan to create zonefiles (automatically
‘statically survey’), translating 3d space into a 1d network
topology.</span></p>
<p><span>Magnus is thinking about
the load placed on these services especially for geodetic
resolution.</span></p>
<p><span>We think the local
low-latency resolution might be the best use case for the SIGCOMM
paper.</span></p>
<p><span>On EIO Anil said it’s not
worth making this a unikernel, just to use the Mirage
libraries.</span></p>
<p><span>Anil said Magnus might
want to try deploying AEON as a next step.</span></p>
<h2>Shark</h2>
<p><span>I believe the plan is to get a prototype
together in time for SOSP.</span></p>
<h2>SRG Seminars</h2>
<p><span>Organised SRG seminars for Noa
Zilberman’s students to give practice talks. Advertised the Xen SRG
seminar.</span></p>
<h2>Website</h2>
<p><span>Added disseration(s) to papers
section.</span></p>
<p><span>My patchwork of makefiles, bash scripts,
pandoc invocations, and more is starting to get a bit unwieldy. A good
project for a rainy day would be to adapt Patick’s OCaml Static Site
Generator.</span></p>
<h2>Matrix
Synapse authentication with Raven Shibboleth</h2>
<p><span>Got a
good resource at <a href="https://nickx.hu/posts/2020-07-13-matrix-synapse-shibboleth-saml.html">https://nickx.hu/posts/2020-07-13-matrix-synapse-shibboleth-saml.html</a>
Spun up an experiment on a Matrix server I had lying around on an Eilean
test instance.</span></p>
<h2>Teaching</h2>
<ul>
<li>TA’d the last L50 lab.</li>
<li>Marked and supervised Distributed &amp; Current Systems for
Pembroke.</li>
</ul>
    </section>
</article>

