---
title: OCaml Workshop 2022
date: 2022-09-16
location: Ljubljana, Slovenia
important_dates:
  - date: 2022-06-01
    info: Abstract submission deadline 
  - date: 2022-07-15
    info: Author notification
  - date: 2022-09-16
    info: OCaml Workshop
presentations: []
organising_committee: []
program_committee: 
  - name: Matija Pretnar
    affiliation: University of Ljublijana, Solvenia
    role: chair
  - name: Anton Bachin
  - name: Louis Gesbert
    affiliation: OCamlPro, France
  - name: Oleg Kiselyov 
    affiliation: Tohoku University, Japan
  - name: Daan Leijen 
    affiliation: Microsoft Research, USA
  - name: Andrey Mokhov 
    affiliation: Jane Street, UK
  - name: Benoît Montagu 
    affiliation: Inria, France
  - name: Zoe Paraskevopoulou 
    affiliation: Northeastern University, USA
  - name: Matija Pretnar 
    affiliation: University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
  - name: Gabriel Radanne 
    affiliation: Inria, France
  - name: Takafumi Saikawa 
    affiliation: Nagoya University, Japan
  - name: KC Sivaramakrishnan 
    affiliation: IIT Madras and Tarides, India
  - name: Beta Ziliani 
    affiliation: FAMAF, UNC and Manas.Tech, Argentina
---

## Scope

Presentations and discussions focus on the OCaml programming language and its community. We aim to solicit talks on all aspects related to improving the use or development of the language and its programming environment, including, for example (but not limited to):

 - compiler developments, new backends, runtime and architectures
 - practical type system improvements, such as GADTs, first-class modules, generic programming, or dependent types
 - new library or application releases, and their design rationales
 - tools and infrastructure services, and their enhancements
 - prominent industrial or experimental uses of OCaml, or deployments in unusual situations.

## Presentations

The workshop is an informal meeting with no formal proceedings. The presentation material will be available online from the workshop homepage. The presentations may be recorded and made available at a later date.

The main presentation format is a workshop talk, traditionally around 20 minutes in length, plus question time, but we also have a poster session during the workshop - this allows to present more diverse work, and gives time for discussion. The program committee will decide which presentations should be delivered as posters or talks.

## Submission

To submit a presentation, please register a description of the talk (about 2 pages long) at [https://ocaml2022.hotcrp.com/](https://ocaml2022.hotcrp.com/) providing a clear statement of what will be provided by the presentation: the problems that are addressed, the solutions or methods that are proposed.

LaTeX-produced PDFs are a common and welcome submission format. For accessibility purposes, we ask PDF submitters to also provide the sources of their submission in a textual format, such as .tex sources. Reviewers may read either the submitted PDF or the text version.

## ML family workshop

The ML family workshop, held on the previous day, deals with general issues of the ML-style programming and type systems, focuses on more research-oriented work that is less specific to a language in particular. There is an overlap between the two workshops, and we have occasionally transferred presentations from one to the other in the past. Authors who feel their submission fits both workshops are encouraged to mention it at submission time and/or contact the Program Chairs.
