---
id: modules-libraries-dune
title: Modules and Libraries in Dune
description: >
  Learn about the features of Dune that interact with the OCaml module system
category: "Module System"
---

# Modules and Libraries in Dune

## Introduction

The goal of this tutorial is

This tutorial uses the [Dune](https://dune.build) build tool. Make sure to have installed version 3.7 or later.

**Requirements**: Modules and Functors

## Minimum Project Setup
<!-- CONCEPT: Dune setup -->

This section details the structure of an almost minimum Dune project setup. Check [Your First OCaml Program](/docs/your-first-program) for automatic setup using the `dune init proj` command.
```shell
$ mkdir mixtli; cd mixtli

$ touch mixtli.opam
```

In this directory, create four more files: `dune-project`, `dune`, `cloud.ml`, and `wmo.ml`:

**`dune-project`**
```lisp
(lang dune 3.7)
```

This file contains the global project configuration. Here we keep to the bare minimum, the `lang dune` stanza that specifies the version of Dune that is required.

**`dune`**
```lisp
(executable
  (name cloud)
  (public_name nube))
```

A `dune` file is required in each folder containing files that require some sort of build. The `executable` stanza means an executable program is built.
- The `name cloud` stanza means the file `cloud.ml` contains the executable
- The `public_name nube` stanza means the executable is made available using the `nube` name (cloud in spanish).

**`wmo.ml`**
```ocaml
module Stratus = struct
  let cumulus = "stratocumulus (Sc)"
end

module Cumulus = struct
  let stratus = "stratocumulus (Sc)"
end
```

**`cloud.ml`**
```ocaml
let () =
  Wmo.Stratus.cumulus |> String.capitalize_ascii |> print_endline;
  Wmo.Cumulus.stratus |> String.capitalize_ascii |> print_endline
```

Here is the resulting output:
```shell
$ dune exec nube
Stratocumulus (Sc)
Stratocumulus (Sc)
```


Here is the folder contents:
```shell
$ tree
.
├── mixtli.opam
├── dune
├── dune-project
├── cloud.ml
└── wmo.ml
```

This is sufficient to build and execute the project:
```shell
$ dune exec nube
Cumulostratus (Cb)
Cumulostratus (Cb)
```

Dune stores the files it creates in a folder named `_build`. In a project managed using Git, the `_build` folder should be ignored
```shell
$ echo _build >> .gitignore
```

In OCaml, each source file is compiled into a module. In the `mixtli` project, the file `cloud.ml` creates a module named `Cloud`.

Observe the roles of the different names:
* `mixtli` is the name of the project (meaning cloud in Nahuatl)
* `cloud.ml` is the name of the OCaml source file, referred as `cloud` in the `dune` file
* `nube` is the name of the executable command
* `Cloud` is the name of the module associated with the file `cloud.ml`

The `dune describe` command allows having a look at the module structure of the project. Here is its output:
```lisp
((root /home/cuihtlauac/mixtli)
 (build_context _build/default)
 (executables
  ((names (cloud))
   (requires ())
   (modules
    (((name Cloud)
      (impl (_build/default/cloud.ml))
      (intf ())
      (cmt (_build/default/.cloud.eobjs/byte/cloud.cmt))
      (cmti ()))))
   (include_dirs (_build/default/.cloud.eobjs/byte)))))
```

## Libraries
<!-- CONCEPT: libraries -->

When using Dune (with its default settings), an OCaml _library_ is a module aggregating other modules, bottom-up. This contrasts with the `struct ... end` syntax where modules are aggregated top-down, by nesting submodules into container modules. Dune creates libraries from folders such as the following one:
```shell
$ mkdir lib
$ rm wmo.ml
```

**`lib/dune`**
```lisp
(library (name wmo))
```

All the modules found in the `lib` folder are bundled into the `Wmo` module.

**`lib/cumulus.mli`**
```ocaml
val v : string
val stratus : string
```

**`lib/cumulus.ml`**
```ocaml
let latin_root = "cumul"
let v = latin_root ^ "us (Cu)"
let stratus = "strato" ^ latin_root ^ "us (Sc)"
```

**`lib/stratus.mli`**
```ocaml
val v : string
val cumulus : string
```
**`lib/stratus.ml`**
```ocaml
let latin_root = "strat"
let v = latin_root ^ "us (St)"
let cumulus = latin_root ^ "ocumulus (Sc)"
```

The executable and the corresponding `dune` file need to be updated to use the defined library as a dependency.

**`dune`**
```lisp
(executable
  (name cloud)
  (public_name nube)
  (libraries wmo))
```



**Observations**:
* Dune creates a module `Wmo` from the contents of folder `lib`
* The name of the folder (here `lib`) is irrelevant
* The name of the library appears uncapitalized (`wmo`) in `dune` files:
  - In its definition, in `lib/dune`
  - When used as a dependency in `dune`

## Library Wrapper Modules
<!-- CONCEPT: Submodule -->

By default, modules bundled into a library by Dune are wrapped into a module. It is possible to bypass Dune's behaviour by manually writing the wrapper file.

This `lib/wmo.ml` file corresponds to the module automatically generated by Dune in the previous section.

**`lib/wmo.ml`**
```ocaml
module Cumulus = Cumulus
module Stratus = Stratus
```

Here is how this makes sense of these module definitions:
- On the left-hand side, `module Cumulus` means module `Wmo` contains a submodule named `Cumulus`
- On the right-hand side, `Cumulus` refers to the module defined in the files `lib/cumulus.ml` and `lib/cumulus.mli`

Check with `dune exec nube` that the behaviour of the program is the same as in the previous section.

When a library folder contains a wrapper module (here `wmo.ml`), it is the only one exposed. A file-based module that does not appear in the wrapper module is private.

Using a wrapper file makes several things possible:
- Have different public and internal names, `module CumulusCloud = Cumulus`
- Define values in the wrapper module, `let ... = `
- Expose module resulting from functor application, `module StringSet = Set.Make(String)`
- Apply the same interface type to several modules without duplicating files.

## Include Subdirectories

By default, Dune builds libraries from modules found in folders, but it doesn't look into subfolders. It is possible to change this behaviour.

In this example, we create subdirectories and move files there.
```shell
$ mkdir lib/cumulus lib/stratus
$ mv lib/cumulus.ml lib/cumulus/m.ml
$ mv lib/cumulus.mli lib/cumulus/m.mli
$ mv lib/stratus.ml lib/stratus/m.ml
$ mv lib/stratus.mli lib/stratus/m.mli
```

Change from the default behaviour with the `include_subdirs` stanza.

**`lib/dune`**
```lisp
(include_subdirs qualified)
(library (name wmo))
```

Update the library wrapper to expose the modules created from the subdirectories.

**`wmo.ml`**
```ocaml
module Cumulus = Cumulus.M
module Stratus = Stratus.M
```

Check with `dune exec nube` that the behaviour of the program is the same as in the previous sections.

## Conclusion

