---
title: Ppxlib 0.33.0
tags: [ppxlib, platform]
changelog: |
  - Fix a bug where `Code_path.main_module_name` would not properly remove
  extensions from the filename and therefore return an invalid module name.
  (#512, @NathanReb)

  - Add `-unused-type-warnings` flag to the driver to allow users to disable
  only the generation of Warning 34 silencing structure items when using
  `[@@deriving ...]` on type declarations. (#511, @mbarbin, @NathanReb)

  - Make the `-unused-code-warnings` driver flag also control Warning 34
  silencing for type declarations with `[@@deriving ...]` attached.
  (#510, @mbarbin, @NathanReb)

  - Add `-unused-code-warnings=force` driver command-line flag argument. (#490, @mbarbin)

  - Add new functions `Ast_builder.{e,p}list_tail` that take an extra tail
  expression/pattern argument parameter compared to `Ast_builder.{e,p}list`, so
  they can build ASTs like `a :: b :: c` instead of only `[ a; b ]`.
  (#498, #502, @v-gb, @NathanReb)

  - Fix `Longident.parse` so it also handles indexing operators such as
  `.!()`, `.%(;..)<-`, or `Vec.(.%())` (#494, @octachron)

  - Add a `special_function'` variant that directly takes a `Longident.t`
  argument in order to avoid the issue with `Longident.t` covering distinct
  syntactic classes that cannot be easily parsed by a common parser (#496, @octachron).

  - Keep location ranges consistent when migrating `Pexp_function` nodes from 5.2+
  to older versions (#504, @jchavarri)

  - Fix `-locations-check` behaviour so it is no longer required to pass `-check` and
  can enable location checks. (#506, @NathanReb)
---

The Ppxlib dev team is happy to announce the release of `ppxlib.0.33.0`.

This release's main feature is a series of improvement to flags controlling
unused value/module/type warnings silencing.
The `ppxlib` driver generates warning silencing items to prevent `[@@deriving ...]`
generated code to trigger unused code warnings. Three warnings are disabled that
way:
- Warning 32: unused value
- Warning 60: unused module
- Warning 34: unused type
The first two are disabled for values and modules generated by the deriver while
the third is disabled for the types in the type declaration to which the
`[@@deriving ...]` attribute is attached.
This feature was added a long time ago to avoid manually disabling those
warnings when working with derivers that generate a set of values and modules
only to use a subset of those. Alternatively, the unused type warning silencing
was added to allow defining an alias type only to be consumed by a deriver (e.g.,
``type error = [`Not_found | `Invalid_arg] [@@deriving to_string]``).
We since then believe that we should not disable warnings lightly, as this
behaviour makes it difficult to find and remove deadcode. The right approach in
those situations should be to fix the PPX derivers so that they are more
configurable and can be used without triggering such warnings.
We will start to move toward removing this feature, but since it is still useful in
some places, we came up with a plan to do this iteratively.
In `ppxlib.0.31.0` we added the `-unused-code-warnings` driver flag and the
`?unused_code_warnings` `Deriving.V2.make` optional argument to control whether
to silence Warnings 32 and 60. When both are set to `true`, by the user and the
deriver authors, the warnings are not silenced. As of `ppxlib.0.33.0`, these also
control the silencing of Warning 34 (unused type).
`force` can now be passed to the `-unused-code-warnings` flag in order to
disable warnings silencing, regardless of the derivers opting in. This allows
users to test whether their codebase and their set of derivers rely on warning
silencing or not and to use those results to eliminate deadcode and/or report
issues upstream to the derivers they use.
We also added a separate `-unused-type-warnings` flag that works similarly to
`-unused-code-warnings` (i.e., depends on the value of the
`?unused_code_warnings` argument), but it only controls Warning 34 silencing, as it
turns out it is less likely to cause unwanted warnings than with the other two.
This will allow users to disable it more easily, without having to deal with
Warnings 32 and 60 straight away.
We want to encourage users to try those on their codebase in order to see the impact
it has. Did you have deadcode lying around that slipped past undetected? Does
this trigger unwanted warnings because of deriver's generated code?
The plan is to give the ecosystem some time to try those features and adapt by fixing
individual derivers and flipping setting `?unused_code_warnings` to true as they
do. After a while, we will swap the default value of the driver flag to `true` so
that only derivers that haven't opted in will enable warning silencing. Then as
time goes we will swap the default of the `Deriving.make` argument so that
derivers will instead have to explicitly opt out to get the warning silencing.
Finally, once we are confident the ecosystem is in a good enough state, we will
remove this feature altogether.

`ppxlib.0.33.0` also comes with a couple of new features for PPX authors:
- A couple new `Ast_builder` functions: `elist_tail` and `plist_tail`
  that can be used to build list expressions and patterns with a custom tail:
  `elist_tail [expr1; expr2] tail_expr` returns the expression for
  `expr1::expr2::tail_expr`.
- `Context_free.special_function'`, a new version of `special_function` that
  allows passing a `Longident.t` directly rather that relying on parsing the
  string argument to a `Longident.t`.

Finally, the release includes a few bug fixes to `Longident.parse` and
`Code_path.main_module_name` and fixes the `location-check` flag so it is not
required to also pass `-check` to enable location checks. It also fixes the 5.2
migrations locations, as we used to build nodes with inconsistent locations when
migrating `Pexp_function` nodes.

We would like to thank our external contributors who have been a huge part of
this release: @octachron, @vg-b, and @jchavarri, and a special mention to @mbarbin,
who has not only contributed a lot to the warning silencing features but has
been extensively testing and providing very useful feedback on them.

And of course, as usual, we'd like to thank the OCaml Software Foundation who
has been funding my work on Ppxlib and on this release, making all of this
possible!
