---
title: Merlin 3.0.0
date: "2017-07-24"
tags: [merlin, platform]
changelog: |
  Oops, we went looking but didn't find the changelog for this release 🙈
---

The major change is a new protocol that moves process management inside Merlin
codebase, saving a lot of pain in Emacs and Vim. There are not much new user
facing features.

Windows support is not yet available.

In editor configuration is now done with merlin-flags, merlin-extensions and
merlin-use in Emacs and :MerlinFlags, :MerlinExtensions and :MerlinPackages in
Vim.
In previous versions, enabled extensions, flags and packages were retained
while now only the last command is remembered.

"M-x merlin-use a", "M-x merlin-use b" should be replaced by "M-x merlin-use a,b".
":MerlinUse a", ":MerlinUse b" should be replaced by ":MerlinUse a b".

The old protocol is still supported, so existing editor modes should not be
affected (tested with Atom, Visual Studio and Sublime-text).

Other main changes:
- Support for OCaml 4.05 was added
- Merlin uses a new implementation of short-path by Leo White which addresses
performance problems
- Merlin now works with the upstream version of Menhir
- numerous cleanup and refactoring to decrease the amount of changes to
upstream typechecker
- emacs-imenu feature was contributed by tddsg. It is similar the "outline"
feature in vim for navigating in a buffer.

Thanks to the many contributors (Jochen Bartl, tddsg, Ximin Luo, Jason Staten,
Leo White, Leandro Ostera, Jacob Bass, Xavier Guérin, Yotam Barnoy, Jacques
Pascal Deplaix, David Allsopp, ...).